## S3

> "Simple Storage Solution" provides object storage for static files (media, images, code, etc.) on AWS.

- Unlimited Storage.
- Objects up to 5TB in Size.
- Files stored in Buckets (similar to folders).
- Universal Namespace.
- Returns a 200 status code when an upload is successful.
- Data in S3 is stored across multiple devices and facilities to ensure availability and durability.

#### Example S3 URL

`https://bucket-name.s3.amazonaws.com/key-name`

### S3 Object Overview

- **Key**: the name of the object (myImage.jpeg).
- **Value**: the data itself. Made up of a sequence of bytes.
- **Version ID**: important for storing multiple versions of the same object.
- **Metadata**: data about the data, ie. content-type, last-modified, etc.

#### Highly Available and Highly Durable

- Built for 99.95% - 99.99% service availability (depending on S3 tier).
- Designed for 99.999999999% durability for **data stored in S3**.

### Questions:

- How much storage does AWS provide?
- What is the largest object file size for S3?
- Where are files stored?
- What does 'universal namespace' mean?
- What response do you get when an upload to S3 is successful?
- Is data stored redundantly in multiple AZs on AWS (non-1ZIA) S3?
- What are the main parts of an S3 URL?
- What are the four parts of an S3 Object?

## S3 Tiers

### S3 Standard

> Data is stored redundantly across multiple devices in multiple facilities in >=3 AZs.

- 99.99% availability.
- 99.999999999% durability (11 9's).
- No retrieval fee.
- Stored in 3 or more AZs.
- Designed for frequent access.
- Suitable for most workloads.
- Default storage class.

### S3 Standard-Infrequent Access (S3-IA)

> Data that is accessed less frequently but requires rapid access when needed.

- 99.9% availability.
- 99.999999999% durability (11 9's).
- Stored in 3 or more AZs.
- Low per-GB storage price.
- Per-GB retrieval fee.
- Long-term storage, data store, disaster recovery.

### S3 Standard-Infrequent One-Zone Access

> IA Data stored redundantly in **one** AZ.

- 99.5% availability.
- 99.999999999% durability (11 9's).
- Stored in 1 AZs.
- Costs 20% less than S3 Standard-IA.
- Great for long-lived, infrequently access, non-critical data.

### S3 Glacier

> Cheap storage for rarely used data.

- 99.99% availability.
- 99.999999999% durability (11 9's).
- Stored in 3 or more AZs.
- Pay each time data is accessed.
- Used for archiving data.
- Retrieval time of 1 minute to 12 hours.
- Data that is only accessed a few times a year.

### S3 Glacier Deep-Archive

> Cheapest long-term rarely accessed data.

- 99.99% availability.
- 99.999999999% durability (11 9's).
- Stored in 3 or more AZs.
- Pay each time data is accessed.
- Default retrieval time of 12 hours.
- Data that is accessed roughly once or twice a year at most.

### S3 Intelligent Tiering

> Moves data automatically (using ML) to most cost-effective tier.

- 99.99% availability.
- 99.999999999% durability (11 9's).
- Has a monthly fee of $0.0025 per 1,000 objects.

## Lifecycle Management

> Define rules to automatically transition objects to cheaper storage tier or delete objects that are no longer required after a set period of time.

- Can be used with Versioning. You can use lifecycle management to **move different versions** of objects to **different storage tiers.**

## Versioning

> With versioning, all versions of an object are stored and can be retrieved, including deleted objects.

- All versions of an object are stored in S3. This includes writes and **even if you delete an object.**
- **Once enabled, cannot be disabled.**
- Can be integrated with Lifecycle rules.
- Can support MFA.

### Exam Tips:

- Even if the access policy of a bucket is to set all objects as public, previous versions of an object do not default to those rules. **You need to manually set the previous version of the object to public.**
- With versioning enabled, deleted objects **are not actually deleted.** If you want to _restore_ a deleted object, you can delete the "delete marker" to restore the object.

## Questions:

- What are the S3 Classes/Tiers?
- How many AZ locations are used (excluding one-zone IA) to store S3 data?
- What is the default storage class?
- What is the availability of S3-IA?
- What is the availability of S3-OZIA?
- What is the durability of all S3 storage classes?
- What are the retrieval time ranges for S3 Glacier and S3 Glacier Deep-Archive?
- What is lifecycle management? Can it be used with versioning?
- Once enabled, can versioning be disabled?
- Can versioning be integrated into lifecycle rules?
- Can versioning support MFA?
- Are deleted objects still stored with S3 versioning?
- If a bucket policy sets all objects to public, do previously versioned objects automatically become public?
- With versioning, how would you restore a deleted object?

## Securing S3 Data

- **Server-Side Encryption**: you can set default encryption on a bucket to encrypt all new objects when they are stored in the bucket.
- **Access Control Lists (ACLs)**: define which AWS accounts or groups are granted access and the type of access. You can attach S3 ACLs to **individual objects** within a bucket.
- **Bucket Policies**: S3 bucket policies specify what actions are allowed or denied on a per-bucket basis. Policies that modify policies for the **entire bucket**.

### S3 Data Consistency

- **Strong Read-after-Write consistency**: after you create a new object (POST) or update (PUT) an object within a bucket, any subsequent read request immediately receives the _latest_ version of the object.

#### Exam Tips:

- Buckets are private by default.
- Object ACLs can make **individual objects** public.
- Bucket policies can make **entire buckets** public.
- HTTP status code 200 is return on successful upload.
- S3 can host static websites. Since S3 **Scales automatically** this can be very powerful for simple static websites (a marketing website for example).

## S3 Object Lock

> Write once, read many (WORM).

- Helps prevent S3 Objects from being deleted or modified for a fixed period, or even indefinitely.
- You can use **S3 Object Lock** to meet regulatory requirements that require WORM storage or add an extra layer of protection against object changes or deletion.
- Can be applied to **individual objects or applied across an entire bucket.**

### Governance Mode

- **Users cannot overwrite or delete** an object version or alter its lock settings **unless they have special permissions.**

### Compliance Mode

- A protected object version **cannot be overwritten or deleted by any user**, including the root user of the account. Compliance mode ensures an object version **can't be overwritten or deleted** for the duration of the retention period.

#### Retention Periods

- Protects an object version for a fixed about of time. When you place a retention period on an object version, S3 adds a timestamp in the versions metadata indicating when the retention period expires.
- After the retention period expires, the object can be overwritten or deleted **unless you place a legal hold on the object.**

#### Legal Holds

- S3 Object Lock also enables you to place a legal hold on an object version. Like a retention period, a legal hold prevents an object version from being overwritten or deleted. However, **a legal hold doesn't have an associated retention period and remains in effect until removed.**
- Legal holds can be placed and removed by users with `s3:PutObjectLegalHold` permission.

### Glacier Vault Lock

> Easily deploy and enforce compliance controls for individual S3 Glacier vaults with a vault lock policy.

- You can specify controls, such as WORM, in a vault lock policy and lock the policy from future edits. Once locked, the policy can no longer be changed.

## Questions

- What is S3 Object Lock?
- What is the WORM model?
- Can S3 Object let be set to a fixed period or indefinitely?
- What are two scenarios where S3 Object Lock can be useful?
- Can S3 Object Lock be applied on buckets and on a per-object level?
- What is the S3 Object Lock Governance mode?
- What is the S3 Object Lock Compliance mode?
- What is the difference between Governance and Compliance mode?
- What is the retention period, is there metadata stored to indicate it?
- What can you add to prevent an S3 object / bucket to prevent it from deleted or overwritten after the retention period expires?
- What is the key difference between a legal hold and a retention period?
- What permission is required for a user to replace or remove legal hold?
- What is a Glacier Vault Lock policy?
- Once locked, can a policy be changed on an S3 Glacier vault?

## Encrypting S3 Data

### Types of Encryption

#### Encryption in Transit

- **SSL/TLS**
- **HTTPS**

#### Encryption at Rest: Server-side Encryption

- **SSE-S3**: S3-managed keys, uses AES 256-bit encryption.
- **SSE-KMS**: AWS Key Management Service - managed keys.
- **SSE-C**: Customer-provided keys.

#### Encryption at Rest: Client-side Encryption

- You encrypt the files before you upload them to S3.

### Enforcing Server-side Encryption

- **Console**: select the encryption settings on your S3 Bucket.
- **Bucket-policy**: Enforce encryption using a bucket policy.

if a file is to be encrypted at **upload time** the `x-amz-server-side-encryption` parameter will be included in the request header. There are two variants of the parameter: `AES256` and `aws:kms`. When the parameter is included in the header of the **PUT** request, it tells S3 to encrypt the object at the time of the upload, using the specified encryption method.

- you can create a **Bucket-Policy** that denies _any_ request that doesn't have the `x-amz-server-side-encryption` parameter in the request header. This allows us to enforce encryption policy with bucket-level policies.

- there is no point to having server-side encryption and making a bucket public.

## Optimize S3 Performance

### S3 Prefixes

- prefixes just use the **folders** in the prefixes.

#### examples:

`mybucketname/folder1/subfolder1/myfile.jpg` prefix: `/folder1/subfolder1`
`mybucketname/folder2/subfolder1/myfile.jpg` prefix: `/folder2/subfolder1`
`mybucketname/folder3/myfile.jpg` prefix: `/folder3`

### S3 Performance

- S3 has extremely low latency. You can get the first byte out of S3 within **100-200 milliseconds.**
- You can achieve a high number of requests: **3,500 PUT/POST/DELETE** and **5,500 GET requests**, per-second per-prefix.
- The more prefixes you have in a bucket, the better performance you get since CRUD operations are distributed across prefixes. For example, two prefixes provide 11,000 GET requests per-second.

### Limitations with KMS

- If you are using SSE-KMS, you must keep in mind the KMS-limits. For example, when you **upload** a file, you will call `GenerateDataKey` in the KMS API. When you **download** a file, you will call `Decrypt` from the KMS API.
- Uploading/Downloading will count towards the **KMS quota**.
- KMS Request Rates are **region-specific**. However, it's either 5,500, 10,000, or 30,000 requests per-second.
- Currently, you **cannot** request a KMS quota increase.
- If you're concerned about hitting the KMS limit, it may be ideal to simply use the native S3 encryption that's built in.

#### Multipart Uploads (uploads)

- Recommended for files **over 100MB**.
- **Required** for files over 5GB.
- Paralleled uploads increase efficiency.
- Break big file into smaller parts and upload smaller parts simultaneously.

#### S3 Byte-Range Fetches (downloads)

- Parallelize downloads by specifying byte ranges.
- If there is a failure in the download, it's only for a specific byte range (partial failure).
- Can be used to speed up downloads.
- Can be used to download parts of a file. For example, just header information.

## Questions:

- What are the two types of encryption?
- What are two formats of encryption in-transit?
- What are two types of encryption at rest?
- What are the three types server-side of encryption at rest provided through AWS?
- What are two approaches for enforcing server-side encryption?
- If a file is to be encrypted at upload time what parameter is included in the header? What are the two variants that this parameter header can be?
- How can you create bucket-level policies to enforce encryption?
- What are S3 prefixes? What are they defined by?
- What is an S3 prefix example?
- How are prefixes leveraged to optimize S3 performance?
- How quickly can you get the first bytes from S3?
- What are the PUT/POST/DELETE and GET request rates?
- How does using SSE-KMS limit S3 performance?
- What methods are called on KMS download and upload?
- Are KMS request rates region specific? What are the limits to requests per-second?
- Can you request KMS quota requests?
- If your concerned about hitting the KMS limit, what can you use instead?
- What are multipart uploads, do they increase efficiency?
- What file sizes are multipart uploads recommended for?
- What file sizes are multipart uploads required for?
- What are S3 Byte-Range fetches?
- Can S3 Byte-Range fetches download just parts of a file?
- Whats the key difference between Multipart uploads and S3 Byte-Range fetches?

## Backing up Data with S3 Replication

> A way to replicate objects from one bucket to another.

- Used to be called Cross-Region Replication.
- Versioning **must be enabled** on the source and target buckets. May be easiest to create two new buckets, a source and destination.
- Objects already in existing buckets **are not** automatically replicated. Once replication is turned on, all _subsequent_ updated objects will be replicated automatically.
- Delete markers are not replicated by default. Deleting individual versions or delete markers will not be replicated.
- source and destination buckets **can be different storage classes.**

## Questions:

- What did S3 Replication used to be called?
- Does S3 versioning need to be enabled on both the source and destination buckets?
- Are Objects, that already exist on a Bucket, automatically replicated once replication is turned on?
- Will subsequent objects be replicated?
- Are delete markers replicate by default?
- Will deleting individual versions or delete markers be replicated across buckets?
- Can source and destination buckets be different S3 storage classes?
